Título en su idioma original: Letter from Cardinal Richelieu to the King, upon his Promotion to the Dignity of Cardinal, 1622

Título traducido al español: Carta del Cardenal Richelieu al Rey Luis XIII, con motivo de su promoción a la dignidad de Cardenal, 1622

Fecha y lugar: Escrita en Lyon, el 23 de septiembre de 1622. Procedente del gabinete de Monsieur du Puy, MS. 569.

Resumen de su contenido en español: Richelieu escribe al rey Luis XIII para agradecer el honor de haber sido elevado a la dignidad de Cardenal. Profundamente conmovido, jura consagrar su vida y su nueva dignidad al servicio del monarca. Comparando al rey con una imagen viva de la divinidad que distribuye gracias no para recibir nada a cambio sino para hacer felices a sus criaturas, Richelieu declara que solo se considerará verdaderamente dichoso cuando sus obras —y no sus títulos— demuestren al rey la sinceridad de su devoción.

LETTER XI. To the King, upon his Promotion to the Dignity of Cardinal, 1622.
Out of Monsieur du Puy's Cabinet, MS. 569.
SIR,

AS God showers down his Blessings upon his Creatures, not to receive any thing from them, since of himself he possesses all; but only to render them more happy, and more capable to accomplish his Will; so your Majesty, who is a lively Image of the Divinity, will not think it strange, if in thanking you for the Honour to which your Goodness has rais'd me, I can do nothing else but profess an entire and religious Obedience to your Commands, and assure you that I wou'd rather choose not to live at all, than fail to employ my Life and Dignity (which I owe to your Majesty's Bounty, as I do every thing I possess) perpetually in your Service. I beg of Heaven that it will permit me to be so happy in this Design, that my Actions may signalize me much more than the Purple, with which you have been pleas'd to Honour me. Then, SIR, and not till then, the Satisfaction I begin now to receive, will become perfect; for the only Passion I have in the World, is by all imaginable Demonstrations to convince you that I am,

SIR,

Your Majesty's most humble, most obliged, and most obedient Subject and Servant, RICHELIEU.

Lyons, Sept. 23, 1622.
