Título en su idioma original: Letter from Cardinal Richelieu to the Queen, upon the taking of Privas

Título traducido al español: Carta del Cardenal Richelieu a la Reina Ana de Austria sobre la toma de Privas

Fecha y lugar: Escrita en Privas, el 13 de mayo de 1629.

Resumen de su contenido en español: Richelieu informa a la Reina Ana de Austria sobre los dramáticos sucesos ocurridos en la toma de la ciudad hugonota de Privas. Relata cómo, en el momento en que las tropas reales tomaban el fuerte de Toulon, un fanático hugonota llamado Chambelan prendió fuego a un polvorín, matando a muchos compañeros y causando que los supervivientes saltaran desde las murallas, donde fueron masacrados por los soldados del rey en un frenesí de represalia que costó la vida a más de doscientas personas. La ciudad fue entregada al saqueo y quemada completamente. Richelieu, enfermo en cama ese día, señala con cierto alivio providencial haberse librado de presenciar la escena. Concluye informando de que otras cuatro o cinco ciudades hugonotas de la región han ya capitulado ante el rey, y que el monarca permanece unos días más en la zona esperando la artillería.

LETTER XIII. To the Queen, upon the taking of Privas.
MADAM,

THat your Majesty might be fully inform'd of all the remarkable Occurrences that happen here, I have dispatch'd this Bearer to you with all speed, to acquaint you that five or six hundred Men, who had retir'd into the Fort of Thoulon, having surrender'd themselves at Discretion to his Majesty, the King was resolv'd to have part of them hang'd, another sent to the Gallies, and the least guilty among them to be pardon'd. But so it fell out, that as the Guards were entring the above-mention'd Fort, to prevent any Disorder, some Hugonots, more desperate than their Fellows, and among the rest one Chambelan of Privas, who had, as long as he was able, oppos'd their Surrendring at Discretion, by representing to them, That such People were generally hang'd for their pains; and that it was better to die by Fire, than by a Halter: I'll immediately, said he, having a Match in his Hand, set Fire to the Powder. And had no sooner said so, but was as good as his Word. The Fire destroy'd some of them; and others in the Fright threw themselves from the Bastion on which they stood, clearly out of the Fort, which was encompassed with the whole Army; for we were forc'd to block up the place before they wou'd surrender: But the Soldiers imagining that they had blown up the Guards, who it seems were upon a high Platform above this Bastion, fell so outrageously upon these poor Men that leapt down, that they kill'd above two hundred of them, and that with such Fury and Disorder, that several of the Army were slain there, and some principal Officers had much ado to save themselves. Dr. Mullot fancied he shou'd have been dispatch'd thither as a Minister, but at present is more vexed at the Quality that has been given him, than at the Danger he underwent.

It looks as if it were a particular Judgment of God upon this City, which has been always the Seat of Heresie

in these Quarters. At first it was not resolv'd to abandon it to Pillage, but at Night its Fate was decreed, so the Gates were left open, for the Soldiers to march in, and plunder it. All Endeavours were us'd to save it from being burnt, but in vain, for not one House is left standing in the Town, but all bury'd in Ashes. Nothing was omitted that might serve to preserve those that were retir'd into the Fort of Toulon, from the Fury of the Soldiers, but they were constrain'd to expose themselves to it, leaping down from their Fortifications, and giving the Soldiers an occasion to exercise their Rage upon them with Fire, with which some desperate Fellows among them, thought to have burnt themselves with the King's People.

Heaven was so kind to me, that I did not behold this cruel Scene; for the small Fatigue I had undergone for about seven or eight Days, during the Siege, constrain'd me to keep my Bed that very Day, on which these Wretches were us'd in this manner.

This involuntary Rigour which befel this City, and the Clemency that his Majesty has shew'd towards those places that surrendred freely, will convince the rest how much they are oblig'd in Interest to make their Peace in time, and not stay till they are constrain'd to return to their Duty. And indeed in these Parts, four or five small Cities, but well fortify'd, have already surrendred, viz. Bastide, Vagnac, la Tour de Salvas, and Baulines. Chabrille is to wait upon the King to Morrow, and yield up to him all the small Castles of Boussiers, and the Baulines, which were look'd upon to be the strongest of the said Places.

On the Tenth Day after the Trenches were open, Privas was taken, altho' the Fortifications of that Town were exceeding strong.

'Tis impossible to relate the several Cruelties which these Rebels have us'd towards the Catholicks. Among others, after the Siege was begun, they took the Guardian of the Capuchins of Valence, a Man of an excellent Life, and singular Learning, and they treated him in so barbarous a manner, that they wou'd not kill him outright, till they had first cut off his Nose, and pluck'd out his Eyes.

St. André, and Ten or Twelve of the principal Leaders, are taken Prisoners. Several are in the Hands of some Gentlemen of the Army, who will endeavour to save them, for the great Summs of Money they offer for their

Lives. Others have made their Escapes. And this, Madam, is an account of what has happen'd to Privas.

The King will not part these two or three Days from hence, because he is oblig'd to stay till the Artilery comes up, which cannot be done so speedily in such an unpassable Country as this is. So soon as he has resolv'd upon the Place where he is to go next, your Majesty shall with all Expedition be inform'd of it. In the mean time I beg you'll do me the Honour to believe that no Man in the World is, or can be, with more Sincerity than I am,

MADAM,

Your most humble, most obedient, most faithful, and most obliged Servant, RICHELIEU.

Privas, May 13, 1629.
